doc: sysbuild documentation guide (#43846)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/build/sysbuild/index.rst

.. _sysbuild:

Sysbuild (System build)
#######################

> Sysbuild is a higher level CMake and Kconfig based build system which support

Reviewer: *supports

Author: Done, addressed by https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/43846#pullrequestreview-1060453559

configuring and building a Zephyr application together with additional projects,
both Zephyr based but also non-Zephyr based projects.

A common use-case is building a Zephyr application together with MCUboot.

Architectural Overview
**********************

> Architectural overview of the sysbuild project.

Reviewer: Is this line needed?

Author: Done, addressed by https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/43846#pullrequestreview-1060453559

Sysbuild itself natively supports building of a Zephyr application including
MCUboot.

Additional applications may be specified by the application or the
board. Those applications can be Zephyr based, but it is also possible to add
non-Zephyr based projects to sysbuild build infrastructure.

.. figure:: sysbuild.svg
    :align: center
    :alt: Sysbuild architectural overview
    :figclass: align-center
    :width: 80%

Building an application with sysbuild
*************************************

> Sysbuild is a CMake project on higher level than the Zephyr CMake build system.

Reviewer: *on a higher level

Author: Done, addressed by https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/43846#pullrequestreview-1060453559

This means that sysbuild is built using the same tools as a regular Zephyr CMake
application.

Using west:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :tool: west
   :app: samples/hello_world
   :board: reel_board
   :goals: build
   :west-args: --sysbuild
   :compact:

.. tip::

   Sysbuild can also build single image builds, and it is possible to configure
   ``west build`` to use ``--sysbuild`` per default for both single and
   multi-image builds. This allows you to always build through sysbuild for all
   samples without considering if they are single or multi-image based samples.

   Execute ``west config build.sysbuild True`` to use sysbuild per default.
   The ``west build --no-sysbuild ...`` can later be used as build flag when

>    sysBuild shall not be used.

Reviewer: *sysbuild should

Author: Done, addressed by https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/43846#pullrequestreview-1060453559

Each Zephyr CMake build system included by sysbuild will form a domain in
``west build`` terminology.
Details on ``west build`` with sysbuild can be found in west
:ref:`multi domain builds <west-multi-domain-builds>`.

To configure sysbuild using CMake directly then we must specify sysbuild project

> as the source folder and ``-DAPP_DIR=<path-to-sample>`` as extra CMake argument

Reviewer: *as an extra

Author: Done, addressed by https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/43846#pullrequestreview-1060453559

to sysbuild. ``APP_DIR`` informs sysbuild of the main Zephyr application to
build.

Using CMake and ninja:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :tool: cmake
   :app: sysbuild
   :board: reel_board
   :goals: build

>    :gen-args: -DAPP_DIR=samples/hello_world

Reviewer: The output of this is `cmake -Bbuild -GNinja -DBOARD=reel_board -DAPP_DIR=samples/hello_world sysbuild` which will not work if a user runs in due to sysbuild being in the share folder

Author: good catch, should have been updated when moving location of `sysbuild`.

Fixed.

   :app: samples/hello_world
   :board: reel_board
   :goals: flash
   :west-args: --sysbuild
   :gen-args: -DSB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT=y -DCONFIG_DEBUG_OPTIMIZATIONS=y -Dmcuboot_DEBUG_OPTIMIZATIONS=y
   :compact:

Sysbuild flashing: ``west flash``
*********************************

The :ref:`west flash <west-flashing>` extension command supports flashing of
sysbuild applications.

When invoking ``west flash`` on a build consisting of multiple images, then each
image is flashed in sequence and extra arguments such as ``--runner jlink`` is
passed to each invocation.

Details on ``west flash`` with sysbuild can be found in
:ref:`west flash - multi domain flashing <west-multi-domain-flashing>`.

Sysbuild debugging: ``west debug``
**********************************

Debugging a sysbuild project using ``west debug`` works identical to working
with non-sysbuild projects.

Just follow the existing :ref:`west debug <west-debugging>` guide when debugging
the main sample.

To debug a different domain (Zephyr application), such as ``mcuboot``, the
``--domain`` argument must be used, for example::

  west debug --domain mcuboot

Details on ``west debug`` with sysbuild can be found in

> :ref:`west debug - multi domain flashing <west-multi-domain-debugging>`.

Reviewer: *multi domain debugging

Author: Done, addressed by https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/43846#pullrequestreview-1060453559

   ├── CMakeLists.txt
   ├── prj.conf
   └── sysbuild.conf

A ``sysbuild.conf`` with the following assignment will enable ``mcuboot`` for
the application, whenever sysbuild is used for building.

.. code-block:: none

   SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT=y

Sysbuild also supports custom configuration file names with the
``-DSB_CONF_FILE=<sysbuild-conf-file>`` CMake build setting.

For example this allows you to create ``sysbuild-mcuboot.conf`` and then specify
this file instead when building with sysbuild, as:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :tool: west
   :app: samples/hello_world
   :board: reel_board
   :goals: flash
   :west-args: --sysbuild
   :gen-args: -DSB_CONF_FILE=sysbuild-mcuboot.conf
   :compact:

.. _sysbuild_zephyr_application:

Adding Zephyr based application
*******************************

A board or an application might support additional Zephyr based applications.

Supporting an extra Zephyr based application can be done with a single CMake
function call in a :file:`CMakeLists.txt` or :file:`*.cmake` file.

.. code-block:: cmake

   ExternalZephyrProject_Add(
     APPLICATION my_sample
     SOURCE_DIR <path-to>/my_sample
     BUILD_ALWAYS True
   )

> this will include ``my_sample`` as an extra image in sysbuild, and using the

Reviewer: -and

Author: Done, addressed by https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/43846#pullrequestreview-1060453559

same board as the main image.

It is also possible to change the board used for the extra image, for example
if the extra image should target a secondary core on the same SoC.

For example, if a sample is built for board ``mps2_an521`` and the extra
application must target the ``mps2_an521_remote`` board (cpu1), then ``BOARD``
can be specified as part of the ``ExternalZephyrProject_Add()`` call:

.. code-block:: cmake

>    ExternalZephyrProject_Add(

Reviewer 2: Question on this part:
Is there a command line alternative to this CMake directive ?

Also, does it allow the use of west debug on the secondary target ?

Author: > Question on this part: Is there a command line alternative to this CMake directive ?
> 

you mean like:
```
cmake ... -D_APP_DIR=samples/hello_world -DEXTRA_ZEPHYR_PROJECTS=<path>/sample/basic/blinky 
```
?

If this is what you mean, then not as of today, but you may suggest such feature here: https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/issues/41640
but please provide a bit more details on the exact use-case.
Especially it is not clear how one would provide info as to board, toolchain, etc if needed.

> Also, does it allow the use of west debug on the secondary target ?

yes.
Described here:
https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/1d20fd5a10d201cf2c5fc20f4259121fcf25d468/doc/build/sysbuild/index.rst#sysbuild-debugging-west-debug

> To debug a different domain (Zephyr application), such as mcuboot, the --domain argument must be used, for example:
> 
> `west debug --domain mcuboot`

and here:
https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/1d20fd5a10d201cf2c5fc20f4259121fcf25d468/doc/develop/west/build-flash-debug.rst#multi-domain-debugging

Reviewer 2: Actually, I was thinking of a multi-core use case, rather than combined-app.
Or does `--domain` allows to specify a domain dedicated hw target ?

Author: >  Or does --domain allows to specify a domain dedicated hw target ?

yes, if sysbuild contains builds for different cores (boards) then `--domain` will actually target the core (board) for which that build is targeting.

For followup work, see: https://github.com/tejlmand/zephyr/commit/efa77ac2e8507fea7bf4be4a67bd0b42af7899a7
where you'll see that two different cores are handled by sysbuild.

Reviewer 2: Great, I'll have a look, thanks!

For example passing of ``FOO`` setting to ``my_sample`` application is done as::

  cmake -Dmy_sample_FOO=BAR ...

Kconfig namespacing
*******************

Kconfig settings are variables that takes the form ``-DCONFIG_<var>=<value>``
or ``-D<namespace>_CONFIG_<var>=<value>``.

Kconfig settings controlling the sysbuild Kconfig tree are identified by
``SB_CONFIG``, so a setting given as ``-DSB_CONFIG_<var>=<value>`` will be used
by the sysbuild Kconfig tree.

The Kconfig tree for each image will have a namespace defined by its application
name, see :ref:`sysbuild_zephyr_application`.

The Kconfig setting that must be given to sysbuild in order to be directed to an
application must be prefixed with the namespace, as::

  -D<namespace>_CONFIG_<var>=<value>

For example passing of Kconfig ``FOO`` setting to ``my_sample`` Kconfig tree is
done as::

  cmake -Dmy_sample_CONFIG_FOO=BAR ...

Kconfig settings given as ``-DCONFIG_<var>=<value>`` is passed to the main
application.
This makes passing of Kconfig settings to main application identical between
building with or without using sysbuild.
If ``my_sample`` is the main application, then Kconfig settings can be given

> both as ``-DCONFIG_<var>=<value>`` or ``-Dmysampl_CONFIG_<var>=<value>``.

Reviewer: Typo for sample, and should be `-Dmy_sample_CONFIG...` with underscore

Author: done

This allows users (or CI) to easily build the same application ``my_sample``
with or without sysbuild::

  west build -b <board> my_sample -- -DCONFIG_FOO=BAR

or::

  west build -b <board> --sysbuild my_sample -- -DCONFIG_FOO=BAR

in both cases ``CONFIG_FOO`` is used by the Kconfig tree in ``my_sample``.

> An example of building ``hello_world`` with MCUboot and build both images with

Author: fixed.

debug optimization:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :tool: west
   :app: samples/hello_world
   :board: reel_board
   :goals: flash
   :west-args: --sysbuild

>    :gen-args: -DSB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT=y -DCONFIG__DEBUG_OPTIMIZATIONS=y -Dmcuboot_DEBUG_OPTIMIZATIONS=y

Author: fixed.

application must target the ``mps2_an521_remote`` board (cpu1), then ``BOARD``
can be specified as part of the ``ExternalZephyrProject_Add()`` call:

.. code-block:: cmake

   ExternalZephyrProject_Add(
     APPLICATION my_sample
     SOURCE_DIR <path-to>/my_sample
     BOARD mps2_an521_remote
     BUILD_ALWAYS True
   )

Often it is desired to control inclusion of extra applications using Kconfig.

If the extra application image is special for the board or an application, then
it is possible to create to additional files, a :file:`sysbuild.cmake` and a
:file:`Kconfig.sysbuild` file.

For an application, this could look as:

.. code-block:: none

   <home>/application
   ├── CMakeLists.txt
   ├── prj.conf
   ├── Kconfig.sysbuild
   └── sysbuild.cmake

with the following content:

:file:`sysbuild.cmake`:

.. code-block:: cmake

   if(SB_CONFIG_SECOND_SAMPLE)
     ExternalZephyrProject_Add(
       APPLICATION second_sample
       SOURCE_DIR <path-to>/second_sample
       BUILD_ALWAYS True
     )
   endif()

:file:`Kconfig.sysbuild`:

.. code-block:: kconfig

   source "sysbuild/Kconfig"

   config SECOND_SAMPLE
           bool "Second sample"
           default y

> This will include ``second_sample`` per default, while still allow users to

Author: fixed.

.. _sysbuild:

Sysbuild (System build)
#######################

Sysbuild is a higher-level build system that can be used to combine multiple
other build systems together. For example, you can use sysbuild to build a
Zephyr application together with the MCUboot bootloader, flash them both onto

> your device, and debug the results.

Author: I have therefore taken the proposal but left the last part out.

Sysbuild works by configuring and building a Zephyr application and as many
additional projects as you want (including none). The additional projects can
also be Zephyr applications, or they can be some other type of build you want
to run.

> Like Zephyr's :ref:`build system <build_overview>`, sysbuild is written in
> CMake and uses :ref:`Kconfig <kconfig>`. However, sysbuild is **not** the same
> thing as the Zephyr build system. It is a higher level layer that combines one
> or more Zephyr build systems, along with optional additional build systems,
> into a hierarchical build system with shared configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Like Zephyr's :ref:`build system <build_overview>`, sysbuild is written in
CMake and uses :ref:`Kconfig <kconfig>`.
```

Definitions
***********

> Here are some key concepts used in this document.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following are some key concepts used in this document:
```

Single-image build
    When sysbuild is used to create and manage just one Zephyr application's
    build system.

Multi-image build

>    When sysbuild is used to manage multiple build systems. (The word "image" is
>    used because your main goal is usually to generate binary firmware
>    application images from each build system.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   When sysbuild is used to manage multiple build systems. 
   The word "image" is used because your main goal is usually to generate the binaries of the firmware
   application images from each build system.
```

Domain
   Every Zephyr CMake build system managed by sysbuild.

Architectural Overview
**********************

> This figure is an overview of sysbuild's inputs, outputs, and user interfaces.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This figure is an overview of sysbuild's inputs, outputs, and user interfaces:
```

.. figure:: sysbuild.svg
    :align: center
    :alt: Sysbuild architectural overview
    :figclass: align-center
    :width: 80%

> Here are a few key sysbuild features to understand from this figure. More

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following are some key sysbuild features indicated in this figure:
```

> information on these features is in the following sections.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> - As shown above, you can run sysbuild either with :ref:`west build

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- You can run sysbuild either with :ref:`west build
```

  <west-building>` or directly via ``cmake``.

- You can use sysbuild to generate application images from each build system,

>   shown above as elf, bin, and hex files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  shown above as ELF, BIN, and HEX files.
```

   When sysbuild is used to manage multiple build systems. (The word "image" is
   used because your main goal is usually to generate binary firmware
   application images from each build system.)

Domain
   Every Zephyr CMake build system managed by sysbuild.

Architectural Overview
**********************

This figure is an overview of sysbuild's inputs, outputs, and user interfaces.

.. figure:: sysbuild.svg
    :align: center
    :alt: Sysbuild architectural overview
    :figclass: align-center
    :width: 80%

Here are a few key sysbuild features to understand from this figure. More
information on these features is in the following sections.

- As shown above, you can run sysbuild either with :ref:`west build
  <west-building>` or directly via ``cmake``.

- You can use sysbuild to generate application images from each build system,
  shown above as elf, bin, and hex files.

- You can configure sysbuild or any of the build systems it manages using
  various configuration variables. These variables are namespaced so that
  sysbuild can direct them to the right build system. In some cases, such as
  the ``BOARD`` variable, these are shared among multiple build systems.

> - Sysbuild itself is also configured using Kconfig. For example, you can
>   instruct sysbuild to build the MCUboot bootloader, and as well as build and
>   link your main Zephyr application as an MCUboot chlid image, using sysbuild's
>   Kconfig files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Sysbuild itself is also configured using Kconfig. For example, you can
  instruct sysbuild to build the MCUboot bootloader, as well as to build and
  link your main Zephyr application as an MCUboot child image, using sysbuild's
  Kconfig files.
```

         :compact:

      .. tip::

         To configure ``west build`` to use ``--sysbuild`` by default from now on,
         run::

           west config build.sysbuild True

         Since sysbuild supports both single- and multi-image builds, this lets you
         use sysbuild all the time, without worrying about what type of build you are
         running.

         To turn this off, run this before generating your build system::

           west config build.sysbuild False

         To turn this off for just one ``west build`` command, run::

           west build --no-sysbuild ...

   .. group-tab:: ``cmake``

      Here is an example using CMake and Ninja.

      .. zephyr-app-commands::
         :tool: cmake
         :app: share/sysbuild
         :board: reel_board
         :goals: build
         :gen-args: -DAPP_DIR=samples/hello_world
         :compact:

      To use sysbuild directly with CMake, you must specify the sysbuild
      project as the source folder, and give ``-DAPP_DIR=<path-to-sample>`` as
      an extra CMake argument. ``APP_DIR`` is the path to the main Zephyr
      application managed by sysbuild.

Configuration namespacing
*************************

> When build a single Zephyr application without sysbuild, all CMake cache

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When building a single Zephyr application without sysbuild, all CMake cache
```

settings and Kconfig build options given on the command line as
``-D<var>=<value>`` or ``-DCONFIG_<var>=<value>`` are handled by the Zephyr
build system.

> However, sysbuild can combine multiple Zephyr build systems, and there are
> Kconfig settings specific to sysbuild and not any application. To handle this,
> sysbuild has namespaces for configuration variables. You can use these
> namespaces to direct settings to sysbuild itself or a specific Zephyr
> application managed by sysbuild using the information in these sections.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, when sysbuild combines multiple Zephyr build systems, there could be
Kconfig settings exclusive to sysbuild (and not used by any of the applications).
To handle this, sysbuild has namespaces for configuration variables. You can use these
namespaces to direct settings either to sysbuild itself or to a specific Zephyr
application managed by sysbuild using the information in these sections.
```

  -D<namespace>_<var>=<value>

For example, to set CMake variable ``FOO`` in the ``my_sample`` application
build system to the value ``BAR``, run:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: ``west build``

      ::

         west build --sysbuild ... -- -Dmy_sample_FOO=BAR

   .. group-tab:: ``cmake``

      ::

        cmake -Dmy_sample_FOO=BAR ...

.. _sysbuild_kconfig_namespacing:

Kconfig namespacing
===================

To set a sysbuild Kconfig option ``<var>`` to value ``<value>``, use::

  -DSB_CONFIG_<var>=<value>

That is, ``SB_CONFIG`` is the namespace prefix for sysbuild's Kconfig
options.

To set a Zephyr application's Kconfig option instead, use::

  -D<namespace>_CONFIG_<var>=<value>

Here, ``<namespace>`` is the application name discussed above in
:ref:`sysbuild_cmake_namespace`.

For example, to set Kconfig option ``FOO`` in the ``my_sample`` application
build system to the value ``BAR``, run:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: ``west build``

      ::

         west build --sysbuild ... -- -Dmy_sample_FOO=BAR

   .. group-tab:: ``cmake``

      ::

        cmake -Dmy_sample_FOO=BAR ...

Kconfig namespaces for the main application
===========================================

> Kconfig settings that look like ``-DCONFIG_<var>=<value>`` are also passed to
> the main Zephyr application. This makes it possible to set Kconfig values at
> CMake time in the same way, regardless of whether you are using sysbuild.
> 
> The application-specific namespace for the main application exists, too. For
> example, if ``my_sample`` is the main application, you can control its Kconfig
> values with either ``-DCONFIG_<var>=<value>`` or
> ``-Dmy_sample_CONFIG_<var>=<value>``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can pass Kconfig settings to the main Zephyr application in the following ways:

* Formatting Kconfig settings as ``-DCONFIG_<var>=<value>``.
  This allows you to set Kconfig values at
  *CMake time* in the same way, whether you are using sysbuild or not.
* Using the application-specific namespace for the main application.

For example, if ``my_sample`` is the main application, you can control its Kconfig
values with either ``-DCONFIG_<var>=<value>`` or ``-Dmy_sample_CONFIG_<var>=<value>``.
```

This allows you to build the same application with or without sysbuild using

> the same syntax for setting Kconfig values at CMake time. For example, this::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the same syntax for setting Kconfig values at CMake time.
For example, the following commands will work in the same way:
```

> 
>   west build -b <board> my_sample -- -DCONFIG_FOO=BAR
> 
> will work the same way as::
> 
>   west build -b <board> --sysbuild my_sample -- -DCONFIG_FOO=BAR

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

::

  west build -b <board> my_sample -- -DCONFIG_FOO=BAR

::

  west build -b <board> --sysbuild my_sample -- -DCONFIG_FOO=BAR
```

In both cases, the ``my_sample`` Kconfig option ``CONFIG_FOO`` is set to
``BAR``

> Sysbuild flashing: ``west flash``
> *********************************

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sysbuild flashing using ``west flash``
**************************************
```

You can use :ref:`west flash <west-flashing>` to flash applications with
sysbuild.

> When invoking ``west flash`` on a build consisting of multiple images, then each
> image is flashed in sequence. Extra arguments such as ``--runner jlink`` are
> passed to each invocation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When invoking ``west flash`` on a build consisting of multiple images, each
image is flashed in sequence. Extra arguments such as ``--runner jlink`` are
passed to each invocation.
```

For more details, see :ref:`west-multi-domain-flashing`.

> Sysbuild debugging: ``west debug``
> **********************************

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sysbuild debugging using ``west debug``
***************************************
```

> You can debug the main application when using sysbuild with ``west debug`` in
> the same way you'd use it without sysbuild. Just follow the existing :ref:`west
> debug <west-debugging>` guide to debug the main sample.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use ``west debug``  to debug the main application, whether you are using sysbuild or not. 
Just follow the existing :ref:`west debug <west-debugging>` guide to debug the main sample.
```

To debug a different domain (Zephyr application), such as ``mcuboot``, use

> the ``--domain`` argument, like this::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the ``--domain`` argument, as follows::
```

  west debug --domain mcuboot

For more details, see :ref:`west-multi-domain-debugging`.

Building a sample with MCUboot
******************************

> Just as Zephyr itself is compatible with MCUboot, sysbuild supports MCUboot
> natively.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sysbuild supports MCUboot natively.
```

> To build a sample, such as ``hello_world``, with MCUboot, it is enough to just
> enable MCUboot and build and flash the sample, like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To build a sample like ``hello_world`` with MCUboot,
enable MCUboot and build and flash the sample as follows:
```

         :compact:

   .. group-tab:: ``cmake``

      .. zephyr-app-commands::
         :tool: cmake
         :app: share/sysbuild
         :board: reel_board
         :goals: build
         :gen-args: -DAPP_DIR=samples/hello_world -DSB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT=y
         :compact:

This builds ``hello_world`` and ``mcuboot`` for the ``reel_board``, and then
flashes both the ``mcuboot`` and ``hello_world`` application images to the
board.

More detailed information regarding the use of MCUboot with Zephyr can be found
in the `MCUboot with Zephyr`_ documentation page on the MCUboot website.

.. note::

   MCUBoot default configuration will perform a full chip erase when flashed.
   This can be controlled through the MCUBoot Kconfig option
   ``CONFIG_ZEPHYR_TRY_MASS_ERASE``. If this option is enabled, then flashing
   only MCUBoot, for example using ``west flash --domain mcuboot``, may erase
   the entire flash, including the main application image.

Sysbuild Kconfig file
*********************

You can set sysbuild's Kconfig options for a single application using
configuration files. By default, sysbuild looks for a configuration file named

> ``sysbuild.conf`` in the application top-level directory, like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``sysbuild.conf`` in the application top-level directory.

In the following example, there is a :file:`sysbuild.conf` file that enables building and flashing with
MCUboot whenever sysbuild is used:
```

.. code-block:: none

   <home>/application
   ├── CMakeLists.txt
   ├── prj.conf
   └── sysbuild.conf

> Here is an :file:`sysbuild.conf` file which enables building and flashing with
> MCUboot whenever sysbuild is used:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> .. code-block:: none
> 
>    SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT=y

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: none

   SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT=y
```

Is there an introductory sentence for describing this Kconfig option?

Author: Good point, there doesn't seem to be such a sentence.

Let me try to find a place for introducing some sysbuild config option.

You can set a configuration file to use with the
``-DSB_CONF_FILE=<sysbuild-conf-file>`` CMake build setting.

> For example, this allows you to create ``sysbuild-mcuboot.conf`` and then
> specify this file instead when building with sysbuild, like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, you can create ``sysbuild-mcuboot.conf`` and then
specify this file when building with sysbuild, as follows:
```

         :gen-args: -DSB_CONF_FILE=sysbuild-mcuboot.conf
         :compact:

   .. group-tab:: ``cmake``

      .. zephyr-app-commands::
         :tool: cmake
         :app: share/sysbuild
         :board: reel_board
         :goals: build
         :gen-args: -DAPP_DIR=samples/hello_world -DSB_CONF_FILE=sysbuild-mcuboot.conf
         :compact:

.. _sysbuild_zephyr_application:

Adding Zephyr applications to sysbuild
**************************************

You can use the ``ExternalZephyrProject_Add()`` function to add Zephyr
applications as sysbuild domains. Call this CMake function from your main
:file:`CMakeLists.txt` file, or any other CMake file you know will run.

Targeting the same board
========================

To include ``my_sample`` as another sysbuild domain, targeting the same board
as the main image, use this example:

.. code-block:: cmake

   ExternalZephyrProject_Add(
     APPLICATION my_sample
     SOURCE_DIR <path-to>/my_sample
     BUILD_ALWAYS True
   )

This could be useful, for example, if your board requires you to build and flash an
SoC-specific bootloader along with your main application.

Targeting a different board
===========================

> For example, if your main application is built for ``mps2_an521``, and your
> helper application must target the ``mps2_an521_remote`` board (cpu1), add
> a CMake function call that looks like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your main application, for example, is built for ``mps2_an521``, and your
helper application must target the ``mps2_an521_remote`` board (cpu1), add
a CMake function call that is structured as follows:
```

.. code-block:: cmake

   ExternalZephyrProject_Add(
     APPLICATION my_sample
     SOURCE_DIR <path-to>/my_sample
     BOARD mps2_an521_remote
     BUILD_ALWAYS True
   )

This could be useful, for example, if your main application requires another
helper Zephyr application to be built and flashed alongside it, but the helper
runs on another core in your SoC.

> Conditionally, with Kconfig
> ===========================

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Targeting conditionally using Kconfig
=====================================
```

You can control whether extra applications are included as sysbuild domains
using Kconfig.

> If the extra application image is special for the board or an application, then
> it is possible to create to additional files, a :file:`sysbuild.cmake` and a
> :file:`Kconfig.sysbuild` file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the extra application image is specific to the board or an application, 
you can create two additional files: :file:`sysbuild.cmake` and :file:`Kconfig.sysbuild`.
```

For an application, this would look like this:

.. code-block:: none

   <home>/application
   ├── CMakeLists.txt
   ├── prj.conf
   ├── Kconfig.sysbuild
   └── sysbuild.cmake

> Here, :file:`sysbuild.cmake` contains:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the previous example, :file:`sysbuild.cmake` would be structured as follows:
```

.. code-block:: cmake

   if(SB_CONFIG_SECOND_SAMPLE)
     ExternalZephyrProject_Add(
       APPLICATION second_sample
       SOURCE_DIR <path-to>/second_sample
       BUILD_ALWAYS True
     )
   endif()

> And :file:`Kconfig.sysbuild` contains:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:file:`Kconfig.sysbuild` would be structured as follows:
```

.. code-block:: kconfig

   source "sysbuild/Kconfig"

   config SECOND_SAMPLE
           bool "Second sample"
           default y

> This will include ``second_sample`` by default, while still allowing you to
> disable it using the Kconfig option ``SECOND_SAMPLE``. For more information on
> setting sysbuild Kconfig options, see :ref:`sysbuild_kconfig_namespacing`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This will include ``second_sample`` by default, while still allowing you to
disable it using the Kconfig option ``SECOND_SAMPLE``. 

For more information on setting sysbuild Kconfig options,
see :ref:`sysbuild_kconfig_namespacing`.
```

information.

To set the variable ``<var>`` in the namespace ``<namespace>``, use this syntax::

  -D<namespace>_<var>=<value>

For example, to set the CMake variable ``FOO`` in the ``my_sample`` application
build system to the value ``BAR``, run the following commands:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: ``west build``

      ::

         west build --sysbuild ... -- -Dmy_sample_FOO=BAR

   .. group-tab:: ``cmake``

      ::

        cmake -Dmy_sample_FOO=BAR ...

.. _sysbuild_kconfig_namespacing:

Kconfig namespacing
===================

To set the sysbuild Kconfig option ``<var>`` to the value ``<value>``, use this syntax::

  -DSB_CONFIG_<var>=<value>

In the previous example, ``SB_CONFIG`` is the namespace prefix for sysbuild's Kconfig
options.

To set a Zephyr application's Kconfig option instead, use this syntax::

  -D<namespace>_CONFIG_<var>=<value>

In the previous example, ``<namespace>`` is the application name discussed above in
:ref:`sysbuild_cmake_namespace`.

For example, to set the Kconfig option ``FOO`` in the ``my_sample`` application
build system to the value ``BAR``, run the following commands:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: ``west build``

      ::

>          west build --sysbuild ... -- -Dmy_sample_FOO=BAR

Reviewer 2: Unless I misunderstood the previous explanations, I think it would be less confusing to explicit the 'CONFIG' in this example:
```suggestion
         west build --sysbuild ... -- -Dmy_sample_CONFIG_FOO=BAR
```

Author: Thanks for catching.
`CONFIG_` should definitely be there.

   .. group-tab:: ``cmake``

      ::

        cmake -Dmy_sample_FOO=BAR ...

Kconfig namespaces for the main application
===========================================

You can pass Kconfig settings to the main Zephyr application in the following ways:

* Formatting Kconfig settings as ``-DCONFIG_<var>=<value>``.
  This allows you to set Kconfig values at
  *CMake time* in the same way, whether you are using sysbuild or not.
* Using the application-specific namespace for the main application.

For example, if ``my_sample`` is the main application, you can control its Kconfig

> values with either ``-DCONFIG_<var>=<value>`` or ``-Dmy_sample_CONFIG_<var>=<value>``.

Reviewer 2: Unless I really missed a subtlety in these lines, there is some redundancy with the previous chapter which makes things confusing.

Author: good point, let me see if I can adjust the second sentence into a kind of note about `-DCONFIG_<setting>` can also be used for main application.

Author: See update here: https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/compare/ebc0d4ad715399d360d40857fec185763eb1701d..08034b26f59f4d16227e457e8f04f7510f41e8de

Author: made it a tip instead of note.

Reviewer 2: Much clearer, thanks

         :goals: build
         :west-args: --sysbuild
         :gen-args: -DSB_CONF_FILE=sysbuild-mcuboot.conf
         :compact:

   .. group-tab:: ``cmake``

      .. zephyr-app-commands::
         :tool: cmake
         :app: share/sysbuild
         :board: reel_board
         :goals: build
         :gen-args: -DAPP_DIR=samples/hello_world -DSB_CONF_FILE=sysbuild-mcuboot.conf
         :compact:

.. _sysbuild_zephyr_application:

Adding Zephyr applications to sysbuild
**************************************

You can use the ``ExternalZephyrProject_Add()`` function to add Zephyr
applications as sysbuild domains. Call this CMake function from your main
:file:`CMakeLists.txt` file, or any other CMake file you know will run.

Targeting the same board
========================

To include ``my_sample`` as another sysbuild domain, targeting the same board
as the main image, use this example:

.. code-block:: cmake

   ExternalZephyrProject_Add(
     APPLICATION my_sample
     SOURCE_DIR <path-to>/my_sample
     BUILD_ALWAYS True
   )

This could be useful, for example, if your board requires you to build and flash an
SoC-specific bootloader along with your main application.

> Targeting a different board

Reviewer 2: I think that the most common case would be to target a different core or CPU rather than targeting a different board.
Maybe, from sysbuild's perspective core and CPU are just specific cases of "board". If this is the case, from my reader's perspective, it would help the understanding to read it.

Author: yes, in Zephyr all targets are defined as boards.
For example for a `nrf5340dk` development kit with two core, those cores can be addressed as:
`nrf5340dk_nrf5340_cpunet` and `nrf5340dk_nrf5340_cpuapp`.

And to even make it more challenging, when building a nonsecure app and using Trustzone (for example by enabling TF-M), then you even has `nrf5340dk_nrf5340_cpuapp_ns`.

And if you look at the example, it is targeting `cpu1`.
I think we should keep referring to board, as that is what is passed through the `BOARD` variable, but I will add a sentence that each core or cpu on a devkit is targeted as BOARD in Zephyr build system.

Author: @erwango please find updated description here: https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/compare/ebc0d4ad715399d360d40857fec185763eb1701d..08034b26f59f4d16227e457e8f04f7510f41e8de

Reviewer 2: "In Zephyr a board may refer to:"
This is always the case, in device tree for instance, boards and socs are different notions.
Can you replace by "For SysBuild", or "In Zephyr build system" ?

         :gen-args: -DSB_CONF_FILE=sysbuild-mcuboot.conf
         :compact:

   .. group-tab:: ``cmake``

      .. zephyr-app-commands::
         :tool: cmake
         :app: share/sysbuild
         :board: reel_board
         :goals: build
         :gen-args: -DAPP_DIR=samples/hello_world -DSB_CONF_FILE=sysbuild-mcuboot.conf
         :compact:

.. _sysbuild_zephyr_application:

Adding Zephyr applications to sysbuild
**************************************

You can use the ``ExternalZephyrProject_Add()`` function to add Zephyr
applications as sysbuild domains. Call this CMake function from your main
:file:`CMakeLists.txt` file, or any other CMake file you know will run.

Targeting the same board
========================

To include ``my_sample`` as another sysbuild domain, targeting the same board
as the main image, use this example:

.. code-block:: cmake

   ExternalZephyrProject_Add(
     APPLICATION my_sample
     SOURCE_DIR <path-to>/my_sample
     BUILD_ALWAYS True
   )

This could be useful, for example, if your board requires you to build and flash an
SoC-specific bootloader along with your main application.

Targeting a different board
===========================

> In Zephyr a board may refer to:

Reviewer 2: "In Zephyr a board may refer to:"
This is always the case, in device tree for instance, boards and socs are different notions.
Can you replace by "For SysBuild", or "In Zephyr build system" ?

Author: Done
